% NFTFW-CONFIG(5) |  Nftfw documentation

NAME
====

**nftfw-config** \- configuration file for the nftfw system

DESCRIPTION
=========

A standard 'ini' file configures the nftfw(1) system, it's stored in _/etc/nftfw/config.ini_ or _/usr/local/etc/nftfw/config.ini_. The file uses the standard conventions for commenting and makes use of several sections. Empty values can be specified by just using a keyword.

The program starts with a built-in version of the settings, then reads the _config.ini_ file. As distributed, the installed file has all variables commented out using semi-colons.

Values for the main **nftfw** script can be overridden by using the **-o** option. The **-i** option prints keys and values.

There are several sections in the file.

**\[Locations]**

The locations section defines the paths to files and directories used by the system. The program looks in _/etc_ and then _/usr/local/etc_ for the _nftfw_ directory determining the 'root' key and that forms the basis for all paths.

_sysetc_, _sysvar_
These two variables contain the control and working files for the system:

      sysetc = ${root}/etc/nftfw
      sysvar = ${root}/var/lib/nftfw

_nftables_conf_
**nftfw** needs to know where the system writes _nftables.conf_ file that provides input to _nftables_ on system reboot. On installation, the file is written into _/etc/nftfw_ for safety. The variable needs changing to _/etc/nftables.conf_ when the system is live.

      nftables_conf = ${sysetc}/etc/nftables.conf

_nftfw_init_
The location for the initial nft setup file containing the framework used by the firewall.

      nftfw_init = ${sysetc}/nftfw_init.nft

**\[Rules]**

This section provides tailoring of the default rules used in the five processing sections of the program when rules are not explicitly given.

      incoming = accept
      outgoing = reject
      whitelist = accept
      blacklist = reject
	  blacknets = drop

The key on the left is a program section name and the value is the name of a rule.  A possible choice for 'reject' is the 'drop' rule which simply throws inbound packets away. The 'reject' rule jumps to a table in the initialisation script that actively rejects the packet.

**\[Logging]**

_logfmt_
Set the format of log statements (see the Python _logging_ documentation for possible formats)

      logfmt = nftfw[%(process)d]: %(message)s

_loglevel_
Sets the level are we logging at, this value needs to be a level name not a value. Choose  one of CRITICAL, ERROR, WARNING, INFO, DEBUG.  **nftfw** uses the **-v** flag to the set this value to INFO. On installation, the log level is set to INFO and can be changed to ERROR to reduce information written into the logs.

      loglevel = INFO

_logfacility_
The logging facility are we using, it needs to be a facility name not a value.

      logfacility = daemon

_logprint_
Control printing of logged information. Set to False to inhibit log printing at the console. This value is initially set to False when the program is not talking to a terminal. **nftfw**  uses the **-q** flag to the set this value to False and the option will suppress printing to the terminal.

      logprint = True

_logsyslog_
Set to False to inhibit syslog use.

      logsyslog = True

**\[Nft]**

This section affects the nftables statements generated by the rules.

Do we want counters on the statements?

      incoming_counter = True
      outgoing_counter = True
      blacklist_counter = True
      whitelist_counter = True
	  blacknets_counter = True


Do we want nftables logging? By adding a different prefix for each of the tables, it's possible to scan the syslog for events and get feedback from the firewall. To stop logging, just use the name.

      incoming_logging
      outgoing_logging
      blacklist_logging = Blacklist
      whitelist_logging
	  blacknets_logging

Two variables control the type of sets automatically generated for blacklist and whitelist tables. When true, _nftfw_ uses auto_merged, interval sets for the blacklist or whitelist sets it makes. This set type automatically create single entries containing an address range for adjacent IP addresses. The feature is desirable because it reduces the number of matches.

However, at present, the auto-merged, interval sets can cause the _nft_ program to fail in some circumstances, flagging an error. There is a bug causing _nft_ to succeed in loading the set when a full install is performed but failing when attempting a reload.

The bug has been reported to the _nftables_ development team, but no fix has been generated as of the current releases. _nftfw_ will work around this bug, automatically generating a full install when an attempt at a set reload fails. However, it seems a good idea to provide a way of turning this feature on and default to not using the feature.

      blacklist_set_auto_merge = False
      whitelist_set_auto_merge = False
	  blacknets_set_auto_merge = False

**\[Whitelist]**

_wtmp_file_
The **whitelist** command scans the wtmp file, and this variable is normally empty to use the system default. Set _wtmp_file=utmp_ to use the system utmp file, otherwise set a filename in the variable.

      wtmp_file

_whitelist_expiry_
Whitelist entries in _/etc/nftfw/whitelist.d`` are automatically expired by the number of days in this variable. **Nftfw** computes the delay as the difference between 'now' and the time on the file.

      whitelist_expiry = 10

**\[Blacklist]**

Constants to manage blacklisting depend on the number of matches found in log files for the specific IP address - the matchcount. The nftfwls(1) program shows the currently active blacklist and all the information associated with each IP.

_block_after_
When the matchcount goes over this level, **nftfw** blocks the ip using the ports in the rule (Symbiosis used 2).

      block_after = 10

_block_all_after_
When the matchcount goes over this level, **nftfw** blocks the ip using all ports.

      block_all_after = 100

_expire_after_
**nftfw** removes blocked IPs from the _blacklist.d_ directory after the number of days in this value have passed since the last incident. Bad guys keep coming back, and sometimes re-appear several months after expiry. It's useful to have feedback from the firewall to keep them in play while they batter at the firewall door. The system allows for this, see nftfw_files(5) for information on patterns that support feedback.

      expire_after = 10

Symbiosis used 2 for this value.

_clean_before_
**nftfw blacklist** will remove ip from the database where there has been no error posted for more than these number of day, the intention is to keep the database from growing to huge proportions. A zero value will inhibit this action.

     clean_before = 90

_sync_check_
**nftfw blacklist** will check whether the IP addresses in the database that should be active are actually present in the blacklist directory _blacklist.d_. 'Should be active' means that the addresses have not been automatically expired. **nftfw** is largely event driven, but events get missed.  So on the basis that if stuff can happen, it will, this code will recover the correct state of the blacklist directory. It seems overkill to call this every time the blacklist scanner runs, so it is executed when number of runs of the scanner is greater than the value of this variable. The default is to run the blacklist scanner 96 times a day, so 50 seems are reasonable way to run the recovery code once a day. Set this to zero  to turn this feature off.

     sync_check = 50

**\[Nftfwls]**

_date_fmt_
Allows change of date format for _nftfwls_. The default is  DD-MM-YYYY HH:MM.

      date_fmt = %d-%m-%Y %H:%M

_pattern_split_
Replaces any commas in the pattern listing column by a newline and a space, reducing output width on the terminal output. Can be overridden by _-p_ option to _nftfwls_.

      pattern_split = No

**\[Nftfwedit]**

The _nftfwedit_ print function can lookup the IP supplied as an argument in various DNS blocklists. The function is not enabled until entries are supplied in this section of the config file. The Python 3 package _python3_dnspython_ must also be installed. I also suggest that your system runs a caching nameserver.

Sample entries are supplied in the distributed file, and require un-commenting by removing the initial semi-colon. The entry is _Name=domainname_, where the _domainname_ is used to access the list in the DNS lookup.

      ;SpamHaus=zen.spamhaus.org
      ;Barracuda=b.barracudacentral.org
      ;SpamCop=bl.spamcop.net

Files
=====

Files can be located in _/usr/local_ rather than under_/_.

_/etc/nftfw_

:   Location of  control files

 _/var/lib/nftfw/_

:   Location of *build*, *install*, lock file and sqlite3 databases storing file positions and blacklist information


BUGS
====

See GitHub Issues: <https://github.com/pcollinson/nftfw/issues>

AUTHOR
======

Peter Collinson (huge credit to the ideas from Patrick Cherry's work for the firewall for the Symbiosis hosting system).

SEE ALSO
========

**nft(1)**,  **nftfw(1)**, **nftfwls(1)**, **nftfwedit(1)**, **nftfwadm(1)**, **nftfw-files(5)**
